doc/devmine.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: doc/DevMine
permalink: /doc/devmine/
---

# DevMine

A set of projects, combined together, make DevMine possible. Each of them has
its own purpose and as such, the project is very modular.

Most of the projects are implemented in the [Go](http://golang.org/) programming
language. An early prototype as well as the first version of DevMine were
written in [Python](https://www.python.org/) but all of this code base is now
obsolete. DevMine uses [PostgreSQL](http://www.postgresql.org/) as its database
system and this component is essential to glue all sub-projects together.

Current implementation of the DevMine project consists of 10 sub-projects:

 * [crawld][crawld]: is responsible for collecting metadata about developers
   as well as cloning source code repositories.
 * [ght2dm][ght2dm]: is a tool to import GHTorrent project BSON dumps into the
   DevMine database.
 * [parsers][parsers]: are responsible for parsing source code and producing an
   abstract representation of it, in JSON.
 * [srccat][srccat]: can create large tar archives from source code repositories
   to make them suitable for processing on [Hadoop](http://hadoop.apache.org/)
   or [Spark](https://spark.apache.org/).
 * [srctool][srctool]: is a tool to manage language parsers. It can install
   them and run them on source code.
 * [repotool][repotool]: aggregates source code repositories metadata from
   version control systems (Git, Mercurial, ...) and produces and abstract
   representation of it, in JSON.
 * [srcanlzr][srcanlzr]: analyzes source code, from the abstract
   representation produced by the various language parsers.
 * [featscomp][featscomp]: computes _features_ from all of the collected
   metadata and stores them into the database.
 * [API-server][api-server]: serves all data produced by the tools mentioned
   above in the form of a JSON RESTful API.
 * [webapp][webapp]: is a demo web interface that interacts with the
   API-server.

## Source analysis toolchain architecture

The tools from the source  analysis toolchain work much like standard UNIX tools
in the sense that, generally speaking:

  * One tool does one thing.
  * JSON input and output of the tools are pipeable to each another.

A schema is probably better at explaining that so here is one:

![Source analysis toolchain architecture schema](/img/source-analysis-toolchain-archi-schema.png)

From the schema, you can deduce that you may omit using some of the tools when
running the analysis. However, using all of the tools leads to the most complete
source analysis API output.

Out of the source analysis API output, we are able to compute features with
`featscomp` and insert the results into the database. However, `srcanlzr` does a
good job at providing part of the features since it computes things such as the
cyclomatic complexity (McCabe) over the source code or counts the lines of code
for each projects for instance.

## Database schema

The PostgreSQL database is used by [crawld][crawld], [repotool][repotool],
[featscomp][featscomp] and [api-server][api-server].

![Database schema](/img/db-schema.png)

[api-server]: /doc/api-server "api-server documentation"
[crawld]: /doc/crawld "crawld documentation"
[ght2dm]: /doc/ght2dm "ght2dm documentation"
[featscomp]: /doc/featscomp "featscomp documentation"
[parsers]: /doc/parsers "parsers documentation"
[srccat]: /doc/srccat "srccat documentation"
[repotool]: /doc/repotool "repotool documentation"
[srcanlzr]: /doc/srcanlzr "srcanlzr documentation"
[srctool]: /doc/srctool "srctool documentation"
[webapp]: /doc/webapp "webapp documentation"

Commit message:

doc: add documentation and link for fluxio

doc/devmine.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: doc/DevMine
permalink: /doc/devmine/
---

# DevMine

A set of projects, combined together, make DevMine possible. Each of them has
its own purpose and as such, the project is very modular.

Most of the projects are implemented in the [Go](http://golang.org/) programming
language. An early prototype as well as the first version of DevMine were
written in [Python](https://www.python.org/) but all of this code base is now
obsolete. DevMine uses [PostgreSQL](http://www.postgresql.org/) as its database
system and this component is essential to glue all sub-projects together.

Current implementation of the DevMine project consists of 11 sub-projects:

 * [crawld][crawld]: is responsible for collecting metadata about developers
   as well as cloning source code repositories.
 * [ght2dm][ght2dm]: is a tool to import GHTorrent project BSON dumps into the
   DevMine database.
 * [parsers][parsers]: are responsible for parsing source code and producing an
   abstract representation of it, in JSON.
 * [srccat][srccat]: can create large tar archives from source code repositories
   to make them suitable for processing on [Hadoop](http://hadoop.apache.org/)
   or [Spark](https://spark.apache.org/).
 * [srctool][srctool]: is a tool to manage language parsers. It can install
   them and run them on source code.
 * [repotool][repotool]: aggregates source code repositories metadata from
   version control systems (Git, Mercurial, ...) and produces and abstract
   representation of it, in JSON.
 * [srcanlzr][srcanlzr]: analyzes source code, from the abstract
   representation produced by the various language parsers.
 * [fluxio][fluxio]: a tool for JSON/PostgreSQL-jsonb I/Os
 * [featscomp][featscomp]: computes _features_ from all of the collected
   metadata and stores them into the database.
 * [API-server][api-server]: serves all data produced by the tools mentioned
   above in the form of a JSON RESTful API.
 * [webapp][webapp]: is a demo web interface that interacts with the
   API-server.

## Source analysis toolchain architecture

The tools from the source  analysis toolchain work much like standard UNIX tools
in the sense that, generally speaking:

  * One tool does one thing.
  * JSON input and output of the tools are pipeable to each another.

A schema is probably better at explaining that so here is one:

![Source analysis toolchain architecture schema](/img/source-analysis-toolchain-archi-schema.png)

From the schema, you can deduce that you may omit using some of the tools when
running the analysis. However, using all of the tools leads to the most complete
source analysis API output.

Out of the source analysis API output, we are able to compute features with
`featscomp` and insert the results into the database. However, `srcanlzr` does a
good job at providing part of the features since it computes things such as the
cyclomatic complexity (McCabe) over the source code or counts the lines of code
for each projects for instance.

## Database schema

The PostgreSQL database is used by [crawld][crawld], [repotool][repotool],
[featscomp][featscomp] and [api-server][api-server].

![Database schema](/img/db-schema.png)

[api-server]: /doc/api-server "api-server documentation"
[crawld]: /doc/crawld "crawld documentation"
[ght2dm]: /doc/ght2dm "ght2dm documentation"
[featscomp]: /doc/featscomp "featscomp documentation"
[fluxio]: /doc/fluxio "fluxio documentation"
[parsers]: /doc/parsers "parsers documentation"
[srccat]: /doc/srccat "srccat documentation"
[repotool]: /doc/repotool "repotool documentation"
[srcanlzr]: /doc/srcanlzr "srcanlzr documentation"
[srctool]: /doc/srctool "srctool documentation"
[webapp]: /doc/webapp "webapp documentation"
